---
layout: post
title: "Idealism and Realism in the Levant and College Campus"
permalink: "/posts/israel_palestine_idealism.html"
---

The conflict in Israel and Gaza has been in the news a lot lately; and as someone who is generally not in favor of death, I can't say I'm happy with how Hamas and Israel have both conducted themselves. Hamas, of course, is infamous for having committed a violent and deadly attack that killed thousands of Jews on October 7th, while Israel is currently engaged in a bombing campaign in the densely populated Gaza strip, where clearly it is basically impossible to avoid collateral damage (i.e., civilian deaths). Of course, it's very hard to grow up in Gaza (seeing as the median Gazan is the same age as my brother and has gone through at least three major protracted conflicts in their lifetime) — but every time someone's family dies, it pushes them further and further into the hands of Hamas. From the point of view of Israel, I can't say that's a particularly good idea.

Of course, Israel, for its measure, has engaged in a lot of other horrible military actions in the West Bank. I used to be hesitant to use the a-word in the past, seeing as it tends to be very charged, but I do think that the (planning policy)[https://www.un.org/unispal/document/auto-insert-201838/] and (permit regime)[https://hamoked.org/document.php?dID=Documents2133] that Israel has in the West Bank does end up qualifying the systematic set of policies Israel implements in the West Bank as apartheid. Of course, one might object to the point by stating that many parts of the United States have very strict planning regimes, for instance, but we don't say that the United States is engaged in apartheid. However, I think this misses the point; I do think that sufficiently restrictive and targeted land use restrictions, as part of a broader regime to restrict the rights and freedoms of one group over another, qualify as apartheid. The United States south was an apartheid regime for a long time, even past 1965; and scholars of international law agree.

Does this mean I call for the destruction of Israel? Of course not; just as I don't call for the destruction of California or the United States for the policies and systematic regimes of land use that I think are quite evil. The answer, for me, is liberal democracy. The Levant, historically, had a vibrant, cosmopolitan culture; cities like Jerusalem and Beirut were, and are, host to peoples of all different nationalities, ethnicities, and religions, living in relative peace amongst each other. However, as the Ottoman Empire entered its late period under Abdul Hamid II, things started falling apart — nationalist movements committed massacres and genocide, which beget other nationalist movements that committed massacres and genocide, and so on and so forth. Nationalism, as a whole, has a very bloody record, and the only thing it has done is make us all worse off.

---

So what does this have to do with college campuses? Well, by our very nature, college students tend to be idealistic. Mostly, I think this is harmless. People are allowed to have opinions. However, I do think that those who are very vocal about their support for Palestinians on campus should be armed with the facts, and use them accordingly, rather than engage in rhetoric that betrays their cause.

The cause of Palestinians has grown in popularity due to the realization, especially among younger Americans, that the government of Israel is a very right-wing one that seeks war rather than peace. However, I'm not so sure that drawing on ideas such as "intifada" (as heard during a rally today) and describing Israelis not in the West Bank as settlers that must "go home" will do no good in showing that the cause of Palestine is just.

I think the cause of Palestinians is just — everyone deserves to be able to live in a home of their choosing, without coercion, and should be able to live in harmony with everyone. In 1948, many hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were pushed out of their homes in the Nakba, or catastrophe, and I believe they should be allowed to return; similarly, I believe that the many millions of Israelis descended from Jews expelled from the Middle East deserve a home too, without coercing them back to the countries their ancestors came from. There is nowhere for either side to go; and the sooner everyone, from the Levant to Occidental, realizes that, the sooner we may be able to resolve this conflict.

Do I think it'll happen? No. Is it worth keeping as an ideal? Maybe. Nationalism has time and again failed, and I wish many students in Occidental understood that more.
