---
layout: post
title: "Republicans Simply Rejoice in Cruelty"
permalink: "/posts/cruelty"
---

Today, Republican assembly members Bill Essayli and James Gallagher (who is the head of the Republican caucus in the Assembly) introduced AB 1314, which will [require](https://spectrumnews1.com/ca/la-west/politics/2023/03/13/proposed-ca-bill-would-require-parents-be-notified-if-child-identifies-as-transgender-in-school) schools to notify parents if a kid identifies as transgender. It is an unimaginably cruel bill — however, it is just one of a salvo of bills Republicans nationwide have written targeting transgender children, starting with [one in Texas](https://www.texastribune.org/2022/02/28/texas-transgender-child-abuse/) that investigated parents who provided any form of gender affirming care to their children, and spiraling outward to a virtual barrage of bills aimed at restricting and ultimately banning transgender healthcare.

One need not look far to see that this logic does not hold up under electoral scrutiny — Tudor Dixon in Michigan ran on opposing transgender rights and got [blown out](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2022_Michigan_gubernatorial_election), but I suspect Essayli and the California Republican Party know this. They aren't stupid, they know that cruelty isn't an electoral strategy. They are simply cruel because they are.

There is not much extra logic to this — there's a tendency in Democratic circles to assume that Republicans are always seeking to triangulate on every issue to maximize their electoral success, but really they're just a bunch of cruel, heartless bastards. Gallagher and Essayli see the abnormally high rate of suicide attempts among transgender children, and seek to maximize it. I don't know what else to attribute this to.

Given my own struggles with mental health, I can only imagine what transgender children in the closet are dealing with. Additionally, in many cases, school officials are aloof at best and, in my high school experience, cruel at worst, I cannot imagine how fearful a transgender kid is experiencing at home if they are willing to confide with someone within the school faculty.

I wish the worst for Bill Essayli and James Gallagher. I hope they're protested every day at the capitol, I hope that they can never see the light of day without being reminded constantly that they are barely even human. They have no such concept as empathy, and would have been the heartless torturers of the past. And, Essayli, if you're reading this, I hope you understand that you can choose differently — but I don't trust you will.
