---
layout: post
title: "Finding My Place"
permalink: "/posts/what_math_means_to_me.html"
---

I talked to one of my friends recently, and we discussed something interesting: how do we figure out the fields we study. This came after we discussed our plans for satisfying our respective comprehensive requirements in our majors (his, IR, mine, math), but we started discussing what we plan to do with our careers. His brother was a really smart person, chemical engineering degree, but is (according to him, anyway), quite aimless, in part because of indecision. I started to then reflect on why I ended up doing math, when I had had so many different interests in the past (and have a lot of interests currently) that might have led me to go down those paths instead of math.

I think it's fair to classify fields I'm interested into "things I like reading about" and "things I like doing," the latter of which is a far smaller proportion of my academic interests. I find history, biology, chemistry, physics, math, economics, theology, philosophy, etc. all incredibly interesting, but I only obtain satisfaction from academically engaging with mathematics. It's very non-growth mindset of me to approach it like this, but I feel it's more warranted precisely because I have spent time trying to engage with these other fields in one way or another, and I just can't imagine myself being in them in the future. When I read about some insanely difficult thing in plant biology or whatnot, I don't think "hey, I could understand that," but if I read about some high-level topic in, say, functional analysis, I look at that and think "in a few years, I can see myself understanding that."

However, this does raise an interesting question: _why_ do I believe I could, in the future, understand math, compared to higher level subjects in other disciplines? I don't really have a particular answer to this question, except that I'd been exposed to math as a thing valuable in itself way earlier than other disciplines. I started watching 3Blue1Brown and other mathematics YouTube channels at a much earlier age than I engaged deeply with other fields, in an academic setting or otherwise. This kind of content was valuable for me to view math as something that not only could I learn, but that I could grow into as my studies progressed. It wasn't something purely for my own edification, skimming the surface for the purpose of being able to argue about it online, but I felt a true connection to the subject since I had spent so much time surrounded by it outside the academic sphere. I am able to see myself in math in the future because I could see myself in math in the past.

That's honestly a really terrible reason for why I'm doing what I'm doing, and it especially makes my entire life seem particularly contingent on stumbling across some YouTube channels. However, I think there's something deeper going on here — I've fallen out of love and back into love with math, but the reason I've stuck with it for so long is precisely that ability to see myself in it. I'm lucky that I found a subject I felt at home with, and I can only wish that others are able to find the same. I won't understand what compels people to comparative literature or economics, but if they see themselves with a future in the field, that is what breeds excellence.
