---
layout: post
title: "My New Diet Experiment"
permalink: "/posts/diet_experiment.html"
---

I'm South Asian. There's nothing wrong with this, of course, but this fact introduces a few wrinkles into my increasing desire to become healthy and build sustainable diets that will allow me to be more fit. I have a bit of excess weight (currently I weigh around 158–160 pounds, which for a 5'8" South Asian individual is on the low end of overweight), and I also want to be able to lift more weights and generally become more athletic. However, I also love carbohydrates — Trader Joe's Ghost Pepper Chips and rice dishes probably make up around 80% of the solid food I eat on a regular basis.

As the blogger Miles Kimball states, the problem with the traditional "Calories In/Calories Out" framework for weight gain/obesity is that calories expended is a function of what calories we consume — for instance, if you ate 600 calories worth of rice and lentils, you will simply feel more hungry later than if you ate 600 calories worth of avocado salad. The insulin model makes more sense for understanding the dynamic general equilibrium of why people who aren't closely monitoring their calorie consumption gain weight — they're doing it because they're eating a lot of carbohydrates and feeling hungry later, eating more food. This is a huge problem for my fitness desires because carbohydrates, especially easily digestible ones like rice, constitute a large portion of my diet.

More subtly, I have an internalized association between eating, say, rice-based dishes, and eating vegetables. The way I eat a lot of the vegetables I eat today are through eating them alongside rice dishes — potato, cauliflower, spinach, etc., all I eat with carbohydrates. If it's not with rice, then it's with bread, as in a Subway sandwich that I eat with vegetables or chapati with sabji. Basically, the cultural context in which I was raised essentially set me up for failure with regard to reducing my excess weight, thanks to my carbohydrate consumption.

This isn't helped by the notorious amounts of added sugar in basically all kinds of foods. You can't go anywhere without seeing flavored yogurt and flavored milk with almost an absurd amount of added sugar. In addition, the idea of substituting sugar with artificial sweeteners doesn't seem to reduce the insulin response all that much, because our brains still associate artificially sweetened foods with expectation of a glucose response in our bloodstream, and load up on insulin in preparation. Basically, the environment is trying to give us a diet that's heavy in insulin, even if we want to reduce our insulin levels.

Another wrinkle in this is that, at the moment, I'm vegetarian, and though I could choose to eat meat (and open myself up to different kinds of low-insulin foods such as bacon, pastrami, or beef jerky), I currently abstain for ethical and environmental reasons. This means that the window of low-insulin foods is a bit smaller for me than it would be for a meat eater, although there are some clear openings — like eating more eggs, (full-fat) yogurt, cottage cheese, and replacing pasta with edamame noodles, which I have had before and quite liked. Regardless, especially in the upcoming semester and year, I'll probably be a little heavy on the insulin, although obviously not to the same level that I was during first year.

I'm a big believer in the general advice that, in order to be able to consistently adhere to a diet, you need to take an inclusive approach. I do quite enjoy certain foods like cottage cheese, yogurt, and salted pistachios. I think that I'll try to work these more into my diet, while also trying to develop a taste for unsweetened coffee, avocados, and eggs. Additionally, I think it's generally a good idea that, on the scale of adherence, sticking to something 80% of the way that you can do for years or longer is better than doing something 100% of the way you can't get a month through. So, I'll still enjoy my sucralose-sweetened Celsius energy drinks, even if they provoke an insulin response — I'll just make sure I pair with a low-insulin food when I do consume them.

Hopefully this experiment works well, I'm obviously banking quite a bit on it — by the beginning of 2025, if things go right, I should be more fit, less hungry, and closer to my preferred body fat than I am currently.
