---
layout: post
title: "Reflections on 2024"
permalink: "/posts/reflections_on_2023.html"
---

Wow, another year has already passed. Impressive. This was probably the most interesting year I've had so far, with all the ups and downs that such a year could have brought. I think, overall, it was one of the best years I've had, in terms of academics, health, and general overall happiness.

Academically, I think 2024 was the year I truly became a (future) mathematician. I dropped my economics major relatively early on in the spring semester, mostly because I started being unable to see a future for myself in economics. Graduate school was not really an option, in part because I haven't done economics research and in part because it didn't sufficiently motivate me, and the main alternatives (i.e., entering the job market) did not feel worth it. At the same time, I was thriving in my math classes (relatively speaking), and really anticipated going to them, unlike how I felt with the economics classes. That to continue in the major I'd have to give up three math classes in the fall was enough for me to finally pull the plug. 

Now freed from the burden of being an economics major, I also did something I'd never thought possible — I did mathematics research. A very last-minute email from Dr. Mehmet Celik at Texas A&M-Commerce led to me becoming one of 12 group members at an REU in the middle of nowhere an hour and a half outside Dallas, where I spent the summer doing various calculations related to Hilbert spaces of analytic functions on various complex domains, along with my two teammates. I learned a lot during this time, including my work habits, my ability (or lack thereof) at comprehending research mathematics without an intense period of acclimation and practice, and a taste for Planter's Chili Roasted Peanuts. (They are, and I cannot stress this enough, the single tastiest snack on planet earth.)

During the summer, I also refined my exercise habits to focus less on heavy deadlifts and focus more on squats, Olympic lifts, and climbing. The fact of the matter is that I became somewhat disillusioned with the traditional style of lifting in the gym, and I wanted to do more dynamic movements that would stress my body differently than the traditional deadlifts and bench press would. There, I found a bit of success — I moved from a V1 climber to a V3 climber, and obtained a 225 lb high-bar squat — but also realized just how far I have to go in order to do some of the more advanced movements (like pistol squats, clean and jerks, and snatches) that I want to be able to do. Regardless, I kept climbing during the semester, and even though I'd injure my wrist pretty often, it's still so satisfying to be able to move your body in a way that isn't in the confines of the gym.

I also became much better at managing my work and splitting my time between various activities. During the semester, I managed to exercise around 5 of every 7 days, and significantly improved my balance and coordination abilities. At the same time, I managed probably one of the hardest course loads I've ever done — math methods, ordinary differential equations, advanced linear algebra, set theory and foundations of mathematics, and my honors thesis independent study (which necessitated studying a lot of functional analysis). At the same time, I picked up piano yet again, and managed to learn Für Elise, Chopin's preludes in E minor and D-flat major, and, perhaps hardest of them all, Bach's E-major Fugue (from his first _Well-Tempered Clavier_). Through it all, I also managed a 4.0 GPA for the semester.

Fall 2024 was the semester that I substantively moved towards being the best version of myself. I had an incredibly great group of friends, a wonderfully productive semester (over 500 pages of notes in LaTeX!), and I learned an incredible amount. The only thing I can hope for is that next semester is even better.
