---
layout: post
title: "Medication and Medicalization"
permalink: "/posts/depression_medication.html"
---

So, as it turns out, my [post on quitting](https://blog.avinashiyer.xyz/posts/on_quitting.html) was a sign of something much worse that I knew was happening at the same time, but also tried to avoid thinking about — namely, a depressive episode. It was probably the worst one I've ever had; I was constantly tired, paranoid that my friends hated me all of a sudden, had absolutely no appetite, and unable to get basic work done, all of which all looped in on each other to the point where I would walk to different places just to lay down (mind you, I had edits to do and a story that I wrote, both of which I somehow completed in the midst of all this). Basically, it was a really, really terrible time for me to be alive.

Thankfully(?), things got so bad that I finally snapped, called my parents, and they were able to get me a flight home. I got a doctor's appointment, and my doctor decided to prescribe me bupropion, an atypical antidepressant of the norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitor category. I specifically asked for bupropion over SSRIs such as sertraline or fluoxetine because I was worried about some of the other side effects (like weight gain) and the fact that getting off SSRIs is a longer affair than getting off a mild dose of bupropion.

To be clear, I am writing this on the third day of my medication, and it is surprisingly effective. My appetite has returned (so I'll need to manage my weight loss through an effective appetite-suppressing diet) and my mood has stabilized (no depressive spirals since starting the medication). There are some side effects (like mild nausea and headaches) that I have been experiencing around 4–5 hours after taking the medication — the concentration of the drug peaks in the bloodstream around 4–5 hours after consumption, so I'm not particularly worried about this. Obviously I am keeping track of side effects, mood, etc. to make sure it's working effectively.

If trends continue, I think I will be more than happy for having taken this medication, but even more than that, I think my life would have been _so much worse_ in the absence of any antidepressant. It's not that there aren't ways out of depression without pharmaceuticals, but that pharmaceuticals are a particularly effective intervention for certain types of people, and without them, their lives would be barely existent. Pharmaceuticals are the key that unlocks people's ability to be themselves.

I've been thinking about this greater fact — pharmaceuticals as providers of power and purpose — for a while, starting with the weight loss drugs. GLP-1 receptor agonists like semaglutide reduce obesity through the satiety response and insulin sensitization; by allowing people to feel satiated when they consume food, and avoid feeling hungry all the time, the drugs do, in a very real way, give power to their users. It lets them pursue the best version of themselves by lifting the mental burden of constantly feeling hungry. Are the drugs expensive? Yes. Do they solve every problem with weight? No. Do the drugs' users have significantly better lives because of their availability? Obviously.

A lot of modern activism surround people's health (mental or physical) seems overly focused on the social aspect of these conditions (as a way to pivot away from the personal failure frame that was commonplace when discussing the diseases). That someone is obese does not mean they should be treated as lesser by the healthcare system, nor does it mean their health is unfixable; and telling someone to "eat less and exercise more" is wholly insufficient, and often demeaning (especially since everyone and their mother has heard that advice). Yet, at the same time, I think unconditional body acceptance (a la the Maintenance Phase podcast) is a bad way of approaching the costs and benefits of weight loss drugs; high adiposity, especially visceral fat, is quite dangerous, and reducing excess adiposity confers a wide variety of health benefits. People who want to take the necessary steps to improve their health deserve a tailwind, and the weight loss drugs give them that tailwind.

I think the worry over medicalization (in obesity, especially) is actually more a worry over gatekeeping — once something becomes a medical condition, you need to go through a doctor or a pharmacist, the doctor will subject you to a battery of questions that you will feel uncomfortable with, and treat you badly, since they are given the upper hand in their relationship with the patient as they quite literally hold the key to the patient's health and longevity. I certainly felt that way when I was in the doctor's office, and even though I walked out with a prescription, I was very worried I wouldn't walk out with one, and I would remain in the dark place I was in the previous weekend.

Antidepressants, weight loss drugs, anti-alcoholism medication (like naltrexone), anti-opioid addiction drugs (like buprenorphine), and a whole bunch of other pharmaceuticals that treat illnesses once thought to be personal failures, allow people to reach their full potential without sufficient prostration towards social goals (be it harm reduction or appeasing the haters). I think that's why they're often detested. Medicine is power — that's why we're afraid of finding the truth of our disease through its medicine. We are afraid of the power we can give to ourselves to shape our lives.
