---
layout: post
title: "Emergence and Urban Development"
permalink: "/posts/emergentdevelopment"
---

Broadly speaking, urban planning has a sordid history — the profession's most notable members include Robert Moses and Le Corbusier, the former of whom bulldozed tons of poor neighborhoods to build expressways for cars, and the latter of whom created the design of "towers in a park" that informed the former's urban development plans. I think this stems from a fundamental problem — urban planning in the modern world is distinctly *anti*-urban.

This is not a new critique — Jane Jacobs, perhaps the best well-known critic of Robert Moses, noted that cities are not some top-down design implemented by an all-knowing technocrat, but a "complex order" that arises from apparent disorder. We can imagine this as the Hayekian view of *spontaneous* order — that is, something created by humans but not designed by them. Throughout much of human history, cities maintained the social order not through special centrally-planned designs, but via norms and rules that emerged through interactions. Ideas such as "put your trash in the trash bin" or "walk on the right side of the sidewalk" aren't displayed on signs by every building, but develop through norms. Even now, with police and laws, the most common sources of order are social in nature — children know to be polite because of transmission from parents and peers, not via a police officer.

Similarly, urban development isn't necessarily a top down process, but something created through the spontaneous order process. What urban planning misses is that liberty upsets patterns, and spontaneous orders cannot be centrally planned. Of course, instead of allowing and facilitating our liberty to develop and redevelop as we see fit, urban planners decide to not only impose their patterns, but enforce them through land use regulation. There are certainly arenas for urban planners — managing externalities, designing roads, public transit, parks, and plazas, etc. — but modern "urban planning" eschews the very nature of urban development.

Robert Moses, the planners of cities such as Los Angeles and Atlanta, and generally urban planners everywhere had a vision for a car-based society, and imposed it onto us. They used land use regulation to ban lower cost, walkable housing by imposing parking mandates and unit and density limits, they rammed highways through the centers of our cities, banned new housing and businesses near public transportation, and converted remaining neighborhood streets to wide arteries.

Now, urban planners do like to believe they're different (although the strict zoning codes that smother our city beg to differ), instead championing master plans to redevelop certain areas around transit — however, this falls into a similar trap as what led to the rise of the one-size-fits-none car-centric planning of years past.

The idea of master planning around each metro or train station, with tons of remediated brownfield ready to have the urban planner's fine hand design perfection, is very tempting, but it ignores how TOD too is an emergent process. Urban planners are loath to see change once they have graced the particular development, but incremental redevelopment of housing around transit and transit around housing is exactly how cities such as New York and Chicago were able to become great. True TOD (that is, TOD that yields sustainable transit ridership) requires tons of small-scale redevelopment — it doesn't just come from brownfield master plans.

I really wish that urban planners throughout our country, and especially on the west coast, understood this. Sometimes it's okay to let transit follow the desire path (and let people carve out their own desire paths when new transit comes in), rather than micromanage every single facet of our public lives. Lifting the vast majority of zoning restrictions won't render the position of the urban planner moot — someone has to build the roads and bike lanes, after all. But it will require a completely different mindset shift, away from master plans and brownfield or greenfield and towards following the desire paths.
