---
layout: post
title: "Reflections on 2023"
permalink: "/posts/reflections_on_2023.html"
---

Oh wow, it's already December 31? That year flew by quickly, and though I guess it's a bit passé, I think it's a good idea to spend some time and reflect on what I did right, what I did wrong, and what I'll try to do next year.

One of the problems with being a college student is that the way my understanding of the passage of time works is different from how The Real World (oh how much I despise that term) denotes the passage of time. For example, I spent the spring semester of my second year of college and the fall semester of my third year of college in 2023, and I'd say both semesters had distinct particular themes (let alone the summer between them).

In spring semester of my second year, I think I finally entered a phase where I started to value social interactions more, rather than being a shut-in. This is probably concurrent with said semester having been the first one without the spectre of either COVID (as was the case in the whole of my first year) or a very bad flu season. However, I think it goes deeper — there were tons of opportunities to engage in different social interaction options before masking protocols were lifted, but I didn't take advantage of them, and basically spent my time in my dorm common room. I started to care about meeting people, talking with them, and both understanding and valuing their friendships on a level I hadn't earlier.

Aside from the social interaction aspect, spring semester of my second year was the first semester I created something of an exercise routine, and dedicated a reasonable amount of time towards building strength and muscle. Towards the end of that semester, I was able to deadlift 225 pounds and bench press 150. However, unfortunately, I started neglecting strength training soon after the semester ended, and as I entered the summer and started going to my internship, instead of working out, I tended to spend long periods of time not eating.

The internship itself was ~fine. The company, Onto Innovation, paid me well and in exchange, I helped solve some small problems and improve the manufacturing process — my first introduction to corporate life. I can't say I especially _liked_ it, but I can say that I can understand its appeal. Solving small problems and making incremental improvements to an advanced company yields a steady paycheck and allows one to dedicate more time towards their family life. Coming at it from the perspective of a college student who seeks mental stimulation, however, I can't say it was totally for me. I enjoyed solving some of the small problems and learning how to use Power BI (specifically, queries in Power BI), but I think I came in with too high of expectations. However, I did get a lot of reading done during the internship.

After a quick jaunt with the family in New York, I jumped straight back into school for fall semester of my junior year, and the best way to describe it is "brutal." I was an opinions editor for The Occidental, our school's newspaper, and I was taking an over-full class load of 20 units, including difficult classes such as graph theory and game theory. Of course, I had expected a difficult semester, but in addition to all this, I decided that I wasn't doing enough, and so decided to also write 5 articles for the paper and start playing ultimate frisbee. To say I was busy would be a gross understatement.

Unfortunately, this meant I also neglected my health in more ways than one. I ate very little solid food, mostly because I developed a quasi-disgust response to most of the food offered in the dining hall, and mostly subsisted off Celsius energy drinks (they contain caffeine, which suppresses your appetite) and cottage cheese (which is high protein and fat, and thus satiating). I had relatively moderate sleep (between 7 and a half and 8 hours each night), but I pretty much stopped strength training and was often phoning it in on class assignments. During this time, I also had redness in one of my eyes (likely suspecting the regular Little Caesars Crazy Bread that I ate that probably contained garlic, which I'm allergic to), adding to my stress.

Unfortunately, I can't say I thrived academically through this time period either. The mental stress, low and constant allergic reaction from my body processing last weekend's crazy bread, and mentally taxing work that is editing for the school newspaper meant that I was starting to falter academically. I aim for excellence on my exams, generally, and I generally want the exam grades to be within the 95–100 percent band — however, I think that the aforementioned factors leading me to study less and retain less from my homework and classwork, as well as generally be less sharp, leading to low exam grades. I ended up redeeming myself on the final (as all the other stressors washed away and I could focus myself), but I can't say I was operating at peak academic performance over the entire semester.

However, despite the unfortunate deterioration in my health and academic performance, I did improve significantly in the social sphere, and spent a lot more time with friends — of course, this was helped by being a newspaper editor, and spending time interacting during Monday Night Edits as well as pre-pitch editorial meetings. Additionally, I spent more time talking with and making friends both in the math and physics major, and I think I now have a solid group of individuals who I know I can trust for when anything might go wrong. Is everything rosy? No. But, I think it's on much more stable footing now than it was even in last semester.

Looking forward, I think I'm going to focus on a few primary themes — namely, academic excellence, strengthening friendships, developing as an athlete, and building a sense of self and style.

I'm taking a 16 unit course load[^1] in the spring semester of junior year, which will likely be substantially less taxing on my mental health (as the marginal unit of course load is much more difficult than the average unit of course load), but these are a hard 16 units — Real Analysis II, Galois Theory, Mathematical Statistics, and Economics of Education. I think focusing my brain on a few, challenging units instead of a lot of challenging units will help me stay grounded and work more intentionally in academics. I'll probably try to do mathematics research, either through an REU or with my professor (likely through my professor) in order to develop some demonstration for my mathematics graduate school applications, as well as do some economics research during the semester to develop knowledge in statistical methods for the possibility that graduate school applications do not go as planned.

In terms of strengthening friendships, I think I'll try to do more things outside of the classroom or an academic environment with my friends, such as getting off-campus breakfast/lunch/dinner, or doing some activities such as hiking. I've really valued the times I've gone and done stuff with friends, such as the time I did some boxing with one of them, or met up for breakfast at a local breakfast place I hadn't been to before, or bar trivia, or a bonfire, or a spontaneous dinner, or a variety of other things. I think my friendships have been strengthened most outside the classroom and the academic environment, and specifically in some kind of activity that is somewhat serendipitous or only planned at the last minute.

I also want to focus on building greater strength and stamina. Unfortunately, due to various constraints on both time and equipment, I probably cannot recreate or attempt to exceed my previous second-year goals over the course of this semester, but I can set some reasonable stamina goals. Currently, I can run a mile in approximately 7:30 — hopefully, by the end of the year, I can run 2 miles at the same pace (or better), meaning I run those two miles in approximately 15 minutes. This will help me both in frisbee (where athletic excellence is important) as well as outside frisbee (as you can run even if you don't have a gym). However, I do also expect to lift weights at the gym more often, as I am not a top bodybuilder<sup>[citation needed]</sup> and can get into better shape.

Finally, I want to develop a sense of style. Over the past year, another thing that has changed about me for the better is that I've developed more of an appreciation for fashion — both the art of it, and its value in modern society. After reflecting on my internship, and more generally the fact that the sheer number of hours of work one needs to do will reduce (in relative terms) after college upon entering the white collar workforce, I've learned that developing one's sense of self separate from work actually matters a lot. Style is a substantial part of it. Don't get me wrong, I love my hoodies, sweatpants-or-shorts, and sneakers outfit, but I think also it's good to develop some heterogeneity so as to learn to see myself in myself, rather than to be an easel upon which others will define themselves in relation to. I'll try to, with intention of course, buy different clothes and shoes to develop a style that I feel is truly me, rather than whatever I decided was the most comfortable bought in bulk. This is a much more difficult challenge than any of the others above, but I believe it's the most necessary for me, and hopefully it's one that I will find fruitful.

Overall, I think I would rate 2023 as a solid B+ — better than 2022, both socially and academically, and I'm looking forward to 2024. Hopefully things have become even better.
[^1]: As it turns out, I am not taking 16 units. I am taking 20 units in spring semester, adding Complex Analysis.
