---
layout: post
title: Legalize Drugs?
permalink: "/posts/legaldrugs.html"
---

One of my more outlier opinions is that I think we should legalize (almost all) drugs for anyone above the age of 18. The main exceptions where I think there's a strong enough reason for the government to intervene to control this is in the case of antibiotics. And, additionally, I think it would be preferable to get rid of mandated prescription requirements for drugs as well. There's a few reasons why.

According to the doctrine of informed consent, a person is the ultimate person in control of their own body — this means that they're allowed to deny themselves treatment even if doing so may harm them (or even kill them). I don't think that this doctrine should be thrown out of the window when it comes to patients making their own decisions on what drugs they may or may not consume (provided proper information and understanding of risk). This is one of the main arguments put forward by Jessica Flanigan in *Pharmaceutical Freedom* and her associated papers, which are a great resource I recommend everyone read.

I think one of the more severe consequences of restricting the ability for people to self-medicate is twofold:

- consumption of more dangerous drug alternatives
- loss of potential new drugs

For example, we may understand a lot of the current phase of the opioid crisis through the first lens — a lot of people, unable to use prescription opioids for pain management, turned to heroin and then fentanyl, which are much, much more dangerous than prescription opioids themselves. Illegal drugs are harmful *because* they're illegal — drug users cannot get their products certified as safe, or get them tested for harmful substances. There is some movement on this with greater access to fentanyl testing strips, but the drug overdose death rates have still taken a massive toll.

Additionally, the current system of drug regulation (i.e., the Food and Drug Administration's efficacy testing regime after the Kefauver amendments) severely constrains the ability for new drugs to get to market, as well as being time consuming for drugs that eventually do get to market. One of the most infamous examples may be the fact that it took 7 years for azidothymidine, an anti-HIV/AIDS drug, to get to market. Of course part of this is the set of incentives that a FDA regulator has, but it is still quite unconscionable to let drugs or vaccines lay in wait while a crisis is going on. A more recent example might be the vaccines for COVID, which were created only weeks after the discovery of the virus, in January 2020, but still weren't approved for general public use until January 2021.

Of course, you might say that it's worth it to implement this strict system of prescription requirements, criminalization, and drug regulation in order to protect the public. However, at the same time, one of the most dangerous drugs, one with very few if any health benefits, is perfectly legal to consume without prescription for anyone above the age of 21 — alcohol. I personally detest alcohol, but it is very prominent in many cultures, which is why I'm not okay with doing a full on alcohol prohibition.

At the same time, alcohol has major social costs — a paper from South Africa found that their sudden alcohol prohibition during COVID-19 reduced injury-induced mortality by at least [14%](https://bibliothek.wzb.eu/pdf/2022/ii22-301.pdf), and more generally that alcohol [fuels a lot of violence](https://www.nber.org/reporter/fall-2001/alcohol-and-violence#N_5_) in our society. Yet, because our culture is so ingrained in alcohol, we don't prohibit it to the same extent we did COVID vaccines during the pandemic, or antiretrovirals during the AIDS crisis.

I'm not proposing prohibiting alcohol, either. I just want to bring forth the juxtaposition between important drugs that save numbers of lives (and other drugs like adderall that allow people with ADHD to function normally that are also [de facto banned](https://www.cnn.com/2023/02/23/health/adderall-shortage-adhd/index.html)) but were caught up in the arcane system of drug regulation and prescription requirements, and the dangerous drug with major social costs that is so ingrained within our culture that we separate it from "drugs."

Of course, the case of controlling antibiotics is very obvious — namely, consuming antibiotics does affect other people much more than consuming other drugs, which is that overconsumption leads to development of antibiotic resistant bacteria like MRSA.

What would be my solution? It's probably a mixture of the following:

- Remove all drugs from the scheduling of the Controlled Substances Act
- Harmonize FDA approvals with the European Medical Association and Health Canada's HPFB.
- Allow people to consume drugs that aren't approved by the FDA (provided proper informed consent), as well as remove mandates on prescription requirements.
- Allow private companies (similar to Underwriters Laboratory) to certify drugs as safe and effective alongside the FDA.
- Redirect saved money to voluntary addiction treatment.

I'm not one of those types of people who believes that all problems would be solved if only we all smoked cannabis, but I do believe that there are a lot of other, more pressing issues in our society than whether someone consumes a drug that they understand the risks of taking, and directing our resources to those more pressing issues would be more effective.
