---
layout: post
title: "Why I'm (probably) not a socialist"
permalink: "/posts/liberalism"
---

Much to the chagrin of some people in my college, I am not a socialist. This isn't just in the sense of not believing in the Marxist teleology of history, but generally I don't believe the American or European tradition of socialism is desirable as an economic system or development pattern. This is going to be somewhat of a meditation on my ideological development, and how, after everything else, I settled on liberalism/Georgism.

Generally speaking, I broadly believe in social and economic equality — I don't believe that inequality is necessarily unjustified (see the [Wilt Chamberlain Thought Experiment](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Robert-Nozick/The-entitlement-theory-of-justice#ref828038)), but that economic systems should result in broadly equitable outcomes. Well, that solves it, doesn't it, I'm a socialist? Well, not really.

As I'm defining it, and how I think most socialists in America and Europe would define it, socialism is, broadly speaking, common ownership and control of productive property. I think this is the defining feature that separates socialism from, say, the Georgist method of economic organization (which believes that unproductive, rent-generating property such as urban land and natural monopolies should be commonly owned, but control over productive resources remains largely private). In this sense, I think there are a few major problems, in political implementation, theoretical outcomes, and desirability.

In terms of implementation, one of my rules of thumb is that a system of organization that can be basically described as "command economy with private profits" is the most politically stable form. Once a certain group of capitalists or business owners obtains enough wealth to influence the political process, they implement regulations to force the entire process of production to be controlled through the political apparatus rather than via prices. The two best examples of this are housing, where zoning laws and city planners control the entire production process, and landlords and homeowners pocket the benefits, and in agriculture (especially [sugar](https://www.cato.org/policy-analysis/candy-coated-cartel-time-kill-us-sugar-program#introduction)), which employs a bevy of tariffs, subsidies, price controls, and government purchase guarantees to ensure that farmers maintain supernormal profits.

If socialism demands common *ownership* and common control, then it has to overcome this genuinely massive hurdle of essentially screwing over a bunch of very powerful interests. Supposing that, in the step towards socialism, there is a greater assertion of common control, then who is to say that private interests won't use their influence to block assertion of common ownership?

In the second case, where socialism demands a form of common or state ownership, there are two major problems that previous scholars smarter than I have identified: the calculation problem and the knowledge problem. For the sake of this argument, I'm assuming we will turn the entire economy into One Big Firm — after all, that's what common ownership essentially is — in which case it's easier to understand what the problem with such a move is:

- Prices and profits are how we coordinate production in the modern global market economy — if you want to figure out what to produce, you will (generally) produce that which fetches a profit after accounting for opportunity cost. Prices (generally) reflect the value of what gets produced to the consumers.
- Companies generally have no *internal* prices, and what to produce is not coordinated inside of the company. This leads to waste and error — of course, this is fine within our current market economy, because competition and entry incentivizes improvements to reduce waste and error.
- So, by converting the entire economy into One Big Firm, we would face the problem of lacking prices to coordinate production, leading to waste and error, but on the scale of an entire economy.

Of course, some might point to the method of shadow prices, but shadow prices in the Soviet Union necessarily depended on the global market economy to coordinate production — and similarly, for price-style planning within companies, they still depend on prices for inputs of goods and services determined in the market economy.

So, common ownership a la the One Big Firm does not yield practical, implementable outcomes. However, one might argue, as G.A. Cohen does, that socialism is simply desirable as an idealized goal. Generally speaking, I can sort of understand this. After all, I'd love to live in a world where everyone was able to work whatever, wherever, and be prosperous. However, we live in the real world, and we need to see how humans act under different systems.

It's not necessarily clear to me that what the current system has is a problem of "too much competition." The competition in market economies is meant to yield *better* products, better services, and higher productivity, in a positive sum manner. If we implement a socialist system to centrally coordinate production, this is essentially ridding us of competition, which is not desirable. As Henry George states in *Protection or Free Trade*:

> But where the natural rights of all are secured, then competition, acting on every hand — between employers as between employed, between buyers as between sellers — can injure no one.
>
> On the contrary it becomes the most simple, most extensive, most elastic, and most refined system of co-operation that, in the present stage of social development, and in the domain where it will freely act, we can rely on for the co-ordination of industry and the economizing of social forces. 

What are the biggest problems facing our country today? Housing? Lack of competition among landlords for tenants. Job markets? Lack of competition among employers for employees (and, in the current labor market environment, we see that competition among employers for employees is yielding great dividends). If we look close enough, we'll see that many problems are source from *insufficient market competition*, not insufficient common ownership/rationalization. What socialism would end up doing is, by having the entire populace own the means of production, and thus unable to create true market competition, essentially get rid of the main mechanism by which innovation and improvements in our standard of living take place.

What ensures competition, then, if socialism, as I suggest, does not? The political economist Henry George's remedy would probably do the trick. He observed that the progress of society generally yields increases in land values, without the work of the landowner going into it. The landowners free ride off the productivity of broader society, while also using the government to restrict competition by using their power over land to exclude others without just compensation. Thus, to ensure full competition, it is both fair and efficient to make the landowner pay for the opportunity cost of using their land. Qua George, doing so will enable efficient and accessible labor markets, maximizing production and innovation in the process.

At least, that's the Georgist view. The main issue that Henry George did not grapple with was the advent of improved transportation technologies — he had assumed that, without the land value tax, landowners would jack up rents until workers were forced to a state of subsistence. This would have been possible back before the streetcar and automobile (as there is a theoretical maximum distance which people can walk to work), but after those transportation technologies, that ability died down... for a time. After around 1970, cities in California especially reached the limit that the automobile could provide. and thus Henry George's remedy can come back.

Creating a functional social safety net primarily funded via land value taxes would yield great dividends — workers would be more easily able to switch jobs, improvements in the economy would stop being zero sum, and we would see greater equality (as land is one of the [chief drivers of inequality](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/2015a_rognlie.pdf)).

Socialism, as in substantive economic egalitarianism, is a great ideal. However, I think that the true solution lies with more competition, more innovation, more truly free markets (markets free of persistent economic rents), not by rationalizing production via centrally planned common ownership.
