---
layout: post
title: "A Personal Evaluation of the Lithium Thesis"
permalink: "/posts/weight_loss_and_lithium.html"
---

I recently read the series [A Chemical Hunger](http://achemicalhunger.com) by the anonymous internet sleuths known as "Slime Mold Time Mold," who investigated the origins behind the obesity epidemic. I came to this series believing in the insulin hypothesis: we gain adiposity because diets high in carbohydrates induce insulin resistance, which results in blood sugar reuptake into fat cells as opposed to muscle cells. However, the series made me reconsider this thesis in light of some other evidence.

To start, they discussed the case of different hunter-gatherer groups that exhibited widely varied diets --- some had very high fat diets, others had diets very high in simple carbohydrates (sugar, honey, etc.). Yet, they all maintained relatively similar levels of body mass index (yes I know, it's not a perfect measure of adiposity, but it correlates somewhat well and it's also very easy to calculate), around 22--23. They posit that this wide variation in diets implies that diet does not inform obesity --- otherwise, we would see that hunter-gatherers that ate a lot of carbohydrates gained weight at much faster rates than hunter-gatherers that did not. Additionally, another wrinkle that SMTM brings up is that the rise in obesity is very recent --- it's not like diets in 1950s America were particularly healthy, and there is evidence to suggest that total carbohydrate and fat intake is down quite a bit from the 1990s, yet the rise in obesity continues unabated.

Paired with the fact that altitude (and more specifically, watershed) tends to be the heaviest correlation with obesity, SMTM posit that contaminants in water supplies (which also contaminate food, since food is grown with water) are the source of the rise in obesity starting around the 1970s. More specifically, after evaluating options they find lacking in conclusive proof (such as antibiotics and PFAS), they settle on lithium[^1] contamination as the source of the rise in obesity. They back up this data by rigorously evaluating occupational lithium exposure risk in relation to rates of obesity, as well as reexamining cases such as that of the Pima tribe (who had one of the highest rates of obesity in the United States in the 1960s) in light of this potential new factor.

[^1]: This really complicates the numerous proposals to microdose lithium into municipal waters to reduce crime rates (since lithium concentrations in water are [heavily correlated](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1699579/#:~:text=The%20corresponding%20associations%20with%20the,encountered%20in%20municipal%20water%20supplies.) with reductions in crime). There should really be a way to get the mood stabilizing benefits of lithium without the weight gain, but also weight effects seem to be common with most psychiatric drugs (which is why SMTM investigated lithium in the first place).

Personally, I believe their thesis to be quite plausible --- by that, I mean that it is the theory I probably adhere to, since I've been a believer for a while that something approximating deontology is really the only way to properly approach nutrition research. In response to this thesis, SMTM also provides some potential results we would expect to hold if it were the case that lithium is the reason behind the rise of obesity; specifically, since potassium [may compete](https://slimemoldtimemold.com/2022/07/12/lose-10-6-pounds-in-four-weeks-with-this-one-weird-trick-discovered-by-local-slime-hive-mind-doctors-grudgingly-respect-them-hope-to-become-friends/#theories) for space in the brain with lithium, if people consume diets high in potassium, they may lose weight as the lithium is "flushed out" of their system (I don't know if that's exactly the right formulation for the effects of lithium, but seems to be close enough).

On a personal level, this is quite interesting to me since I am still a little ways away from my long-term weight loss goal (I was around 180 pounds in June 2022, I am 145 currently, and I want to maintain around 140 long-term), but most of the weight loss I experienced this past year was due to depression suppressing my appetite, rather than suddenly flushing out all the lithium from my system. I think I can plausibly say that now, about 6 weeks after starting antidepressants, my brain chemistry has adjusted accordingly --- and I am hungry. All the time. Yet, somehow, I've been maintaining my weight even despite trying to fulfill my hunger to its fullest extent.

I think part of it is that, around 3 weeks into antidepressants (so, around the third week of march), I started taking a regular lunch of salmon, brown rice, and refried beans. As it turns out, this is a diet that is extremely high in potassium --- a half filet of salmon contains approximately 600--700 mg of potassium, and a cup of refried beans contains approximately 800 mg, meaning I probably consume 1.5x the daily recommend potassium intake once all other sources are taken into consideration. I think the relatively simple answer from here is to take some mashed potatoes alongside my regular lunches if I want to lose those last 5 pounds --- if the thesis is correct, of course. We'll see.
