---
layout: post
title: "I'm a quitter — and that's okay"
permalink: "/posts/on_quitting.html"
---

In Fall 2023, I thought I would be able to have it all — 20 units, editing for the paper, maintaining good grades, and generally being the best version of myself. I despised it. I was tired, constantly feeling like everything was grinding me down, and despite all this, I felt like I had no friends or people along with me for the ride. Nevertheless, after a lot of consideration, I figured I'd stick through with it — and while I did end up with decent grades, I felt empty inside.

Of course, having learned my lesson, I decided to enroll in 20 units again — and this time, it was 20 _hard_ units. Unfortunately, I was not having it, and I started quitting things. I quit Ultimate Frisbee, I dropped my economics major, and soon I will drop my statistics class, meaning I'll be enrolled in 16 units soon. Quitting, it seems, is the theme of this semester.

What's been prompting me to reconsider those activities and classes I obligate myself to is rereading my managing editor's [article](https://theoccidentalnews.com/opinions/lessonslearned/2023/02/08/lessons-learned-how-to-know-when-to-quit/2907716) titled "How to know when to quit." I think it resonated with me because, this semester, I've been really trying to figure out what I want to dedicate my energy to — after all, it's not finite, much to my personal chagrin. What I realized this semester is that, with such hard classes (like Real Analysis II, Algebra II, and Complex Analysis), I simply _must_ practice perfection — or else, for lack of a better word, I'll fail. Obligations that I cannot practice perfection in, like my statistics class or my economics major, effectively must go by the wayside, or else I will fall extremely behind in the classes I must practice perfection in.

Is this really logical? It could merely be rationalization, but I like to believe that, much like Jimmy, I'm simply reorienting my priorities towards the things I love. I love hard, pure mathematics, I love the newspaper, and I love my friends. If I committed to all sorts of other things that were not those fundamental courses of study, I would not only fail in my hard classes, but I would find that my classes made me drained rather than alive, and feeling constantly drained is the gateway to degradation in other facets of my life, such as exercise and recovery.

A small part of me thinks that this is merely a sign of mental weakness — that I was not strong enough to take on a course load that would have brought me back down to the real world. Maybe it's right, and I'm making a very stupid set of decisions; or maybe it's wrong. I won't have to worry so much about my performance in my classes, or the health of my social life, or my mental stability — or at least, that's my prediction once I go ahead with finally finishing my quitting spree. I'm careful to avoid making this into a thing where I become lethargic and a do-nothing kind of person; I want to quit until I feel like the prospect of quitting makes me anxious instead of relieved. Once I hit that point, I know I will be the best version of myself.
