---
layout: post
title: "The Diaspora Connection"
subtitle: "What I Couldn't Write in The Occidental"
permalink: "/posts/rama_temple_hindu_nationalism_diaspora.html"
---

I'm writing this article on February 6, 2024, 15 days after the consecration of the [temple to Rama](https://apnews.com/article/ayodhya-ram-mandir-temple-hindu-nationalists-modi-hinduism-e6765dd13edb57a1644e961471939c30) in Ayodhya. Issue 1 of _The Occidental_, where I am an editor, features an article that briefly goes over the history of the temple to Rama and the role of Hindu nationalism in bringing it to fruition, as well as the consequences of their rise to power. Unfortunately, at the same time, I only had approximately 900 words to discuss all these things, and I feel like I left out a lot of personal perspective as a member of the Indian diaspora. Specifically, the project of Hindu nationalism is, in part, sustained and pushed forward by the diaspora, and I believe this is a particularly offensive proposition.

If you search up groups related to Hinduism in the United States, you quickly converge on a particular few organizations with names like "Hindu on Campus" and "Hindu American Foundation." These groups intersperse their calls for treating Hindus in the United States with respect and dignity with a quite rancid set of messages. The Hindu American Foundation, for instance, got its start by advocating for Narendra Modi to be provided a visa to the United States after his government abetted a pogrom committed by Vishwa Hindu Parishad. Some of their other prominent actions include protesting against the _Dismantling Global Hindutva_ conference, where people DDOSed an event meant to discuss the dire consequences of Hindu nationalism.

These people sure as hell do not represent me, even if they claim to. I was raised in a belief system that's pretty close to Hinduism — I've learned about the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, I've sung the Hanuman Calisa, I've taken the sacred thread, I've done it all. I'm not, however, willing to say I'm a "Hindu," given that that particular word contains, implicit in its description, support for the project of Hindu nationalism in India.

I'm not a "leftist," as in, someone who believes in a politically and economically left-wing project in support of central planning and public ownership of the means of production, but these Hindu nationalists would describe me as such. I simply don't support mob violence in the exercise of a political project I find repugnant — I wouldn't have supported it when VHP committed the pogrom in Gujarat, and I don't support it now with this new temple. The argument that we, as those who hold a particular identity, absolutely must fall in line behind what these self-appointed spokespeople have in mind for us, is utterly backwards.

We are ultimately responsible for developing and realizing politics through our moral foundations — as a product of my environment, I fundamentally believe that freedom, liberty, and democracy are all vital for realizing our potential as human beings. Yes, that applies to Muslims, too. Unfortunately, for the people that claim to represent Hindus in the United States, they are wedded to Melian morality. The strong do what they can, the weak suffer what they must. I'm not about that, and I think if these people wanted to be honest, they would stop acting like everyone who is within the realm of Hindu believes them.

What's so excellent about global capitalism and liberal democracy is that it breaks down hierarchy. The feudal lord is outcompeted by the industrialist, and the serf now owns their labor. I think these Hindu nationalists have a fundamental desire for hierarchy. They want to be on top, and they find the concept of equality under the law so abhorrent, they are willing to use their mob techniques to tear it down. They're succeeding in India, as seen by their temple to Rama, and they're going to try in the United States. They don't speak for me.
