---
layout: post
title: "Reflections on Spring 2024"
permalink: "/posts/spring_reflections.html"
---

Oh wow, another semester already finished, that went by quickly. I guess the best way to characterize this semester is that it was simultaneously the worst and the best semester of college so far. Let's start with the bad so we can finish off with reflecting on the good.

Depression — I guess it defined this semester. More specifically, the fact that I couldn't really outrun it anymore. I did effectively succeed at outrunning my depression in the fall; even if I felt horrible, even if I had occasional mental breakdowns, and even if I got Bs on my Game Theory midterms (sorry Professor Lehr, I was really out of it that semester), I still managed to pull it off in the end. This past semester, not so much. As it turns out, depression can beat you, no matter how many units you take or how much you try to dedicate to lifting or the newspaper. However, my experience with depression did teach me about the power of the axis between mental health and appetite. When I had a relapse in my depression towards late April, I knew it happened when I woke up one day and did not feel any sense of hunger, and quickly tried to work towards a relative state of normal.

Anyway, regarding lifting, I decided to try to get back into it, first by mostly doing bench press and deadlift, then working in dips, overhead presses, pull-ups, and eventually squats into my routine. I think I ended up with the most solid semester of gains — I hit a bodyweight bench press (I weigh around 145 pounds, and could bench 150 as a one rep max), double bodyweight deadlift (315 as a 1 rep max), and squat 205 with decent form. Obviously there's a lot left to go, but I'm glad that this semester proved that I don't have to worry about taking time off lifting, and I can spend the summer in relative mental peace while I work on developing my flexibility.

Academically, this was a bit of a rough semester. I was taking many hard classes (Real Analysis II, Complex Analysis, Algebra II), and even had to drop a class (Mathematical Statistics), and I guess this will be the semester that I end up with my first B in a math class. Honestly, I'm feeling a little weird about that. People are always saying that grades don't determine your self-worth, and I want to believe them, but a problem is that I derive my self-worth by feeling competent. Being able to help people, having a command of the topic at hand, and being able to meaningfully contribute in class and outside is what gives me meaning, and grades usually reflect this aspect of my self-worth. However, at the same time, I have to reckon with the fact that, as time goes on, I will be more specialized, and less able to take command in every class — and that will mean a lot of Bs. I think I'll be okay, even if it will take a few semesters for it to truly sink in.

One major thing that the semester did teach me, though, is that I am extremely blessed. My friends are wonderful, kind, and willing to help me through thick and thin, and even if things get tough, I need not worry as much as I used to. It really feels like this was the semester that finally confirmed something that I had known existed conceptually (a community of wonderful people at Occidental that cared about me), but sometimes you need to go through a version of hell in order to confirm that which you already knew. I didn't only survive, but I could thrive.

The upcoming semester(s) will be difficult — graduate school applications, math methods, my honors thesis, etc. But I will make it, and when I receive a diploma at graduation, it will be as someone totally unrecognizable to the version of me that entered college.
