Henry Grabar's *Paved Paradise* is an excellent overview of the many ways that parking, quite literally, rules everything around us. From housing to transportation to the very urban form we live in, the ever longing quest to park our cars has shaped the trajectory of the entire world. And, Grabar argues, in a negative direction.

The story begins with a subsidized housing complex proposed in the affluent neighborhood of Solana Beach, which was to replace a parking lot. The central character of these first chapters is Ginger Hitzke, who is fighting a pyrrhic war with the city in order to try to get her project approved. The central issue? Her project does not pencil with the parking spots that she would be mandated to build by the California Coastal Commission. Oddly, despite the fact that the mandated parking would kill housing that would allow people to access the beach, the Coastal Commission, which is charged with allowing wide access to the beach, still used parking to nearly kill the project. Indeed, during the public comment for the project, Hitzke once again heard an earful from all the Solana Beach residents about the parking situation. This raises a greater question: why, exactly, are we so obsessed with parking?

Through stories of arguments over parking spaces turning deadly, to affordable housing projects killed on the cross of "where will people park," to bona fide diplomatic incidents over parking tickets in New York City, parking seems to be central to our world. This story stretches back almost a hundred years — in the 1920s, as Los Angeles (a city synonymous with the car) began to develop, and people in Los Angeles began to buy cars, parking, and the associated congestion that searching for parking caused, became the central issue of the time. Cars were left strewn all over the street — at this time, the parking meter was still a few years from being invented — and maintaining order in this carmageddon was nigh impossible. So, for a short amount of time, Los Angeles did the unthinkable: they banned street parking. After complaints from downtown merchants, the city brought it back, however. And, in its place, Los Angeles adopted the mandatory parking minimum.

Soon, parking began to define the urban form. Beloved housing styles such as the bungalow court in Los Angeles, the three-flat in Chicago, and the triple decker in Boston would be illegal to build today thanks to parking minimums. In the 1950s, as Los Angeles began to see a surge in population and demand for housing, builders began to convert 7750 square foot lots into cheap dingbat apartments — required by the parking minimums of the time for 1 per unit built — until the city increased the parking minimum to 1.5 per unit, effectively killing the form forever. Of course, this story did not merely affect the construction of apartment buildings — it changed the entire central business district.

Now that central cities were forced to compete with suburbs, whose cheap land made building large parking lots for cars financially viable, they thought it best to fight fire with fire — or rather, parking with parking. Cities built giant garages, and flush with money for urban renewal, sought to completely remake themselves around the car. They bulldozed block after block for parking and created grand designs for large urban expressways in an effort to woo suburbanites toward downtown. However, in the process, they ended up destroying their very city. After a certain point, after you've demolished your central city for parking lots, there's nowhere *to* go in the center city. However, cities kept their parking requirements, long after their central business districts were all but dead thanks to the stifling effect they had on development and density.

The central problem that cities faced was their inability to see just how valuable the land they used for parking was. The best example of this might be when Chicago sold off their parking meters for a 75 year lease — only for $1 Billion in the face of a budget crisis. However, as soon as they did, the consortium of banks and sovereign wealth funds that purchased the meters immediately increased parking rates, and making a giant return on their investment. Though it was easier to find a parking spot in Chicago now with a properly priced curb, it came at a giant opportunity cost within the city budget. All that meter revenue was no longer in public hands.

Grabar masterfully chronicles the rocket to stardom of Donald Shoup — a slightly eccentric urban planner at UCLA who wrote [The High Cost of Free Parking](https://www.amazon.com/High-Cost-Free-Parking-Updated/dp/193236496X). His followers, known as "Shoupistas," started taking city governments and city planning departments by storm, demanding the three main recommendations that Shoup makes in the book:
- Charging a market-clearing price for street parking.
- Removing mandatory parking minimums.
- Directing parking revenue into the blocks which are metered.

However, parking policies have much more of an impact than the humble pricing of street parking — Grabar discusses how a change in parking is also changing the housing landscape. The rise of accessory dwelling units in southern California can be directly linked to the ease of garage conversions after parking minimums were lifted. During the coronavirus pandemic, as people needed places to socialize outside, street parking was converted into restaurant seating, contributing greatly to the ambience of streets and allowing for some respite during a time of great pain. Starting in the late 1990s, Downtown Los Angeles (the most parking-dense neighborhood in the country) saw a boom as old, abandoned office buildings were converted into new apartments, thanks to the lifting of parking requirements.

Fundamentally, Grabar's book is an optimistic one. We know now what the planners of the past did not — we understand the value of urban space, and understand that, if we actually see it for what it is, maybe we won't use it for so much car parking. I tend to agree; it's time to see what we can really do with our cities once they are liberated of the burden to provide so much parking.
